there's something very interesting about
one of the youngest craters on the moon
it's long named arist darkus after the
famous Greek scientist and let's have a
look at the story of it so here we
go well this is where it is it's the
little bright spot up at the top left
hand side of the moon when you look at
it you can see it best when the moon is
fairly full uh Moon Rock has a special
characteristic that it tends to scatter
light straight back to you called
specular reflection and so you can see
the bright areas standing out like this
once you get to a fairly full moon this
is just past full moon here with the day
night boundary the So-Cal Terminator
beginning to sweep round from the uh
right hand side there making those
craters Stand Out nicely but you can
still see some of the really bright
craters and the brightest one of the lot
is indicated there that is arist
now when people started photographing
this it started all kinds of interesting
rumors and we'll see why the first and
most obvious one is aliens some people
say that it's an alien Fusion reactor
and you can kind of see why if you look
at this image here that uh tends to be
uh circulated it looks to be glowing
away there and it looks to have some
sort of ring structure with segments uh
emerging from it
well what's going on well here is a
image actually from another one on earth
perhaps you might think it's great big
strange dome in the desert here but
what's really going on is the picture
has been turned upside down this is in
fact an image of meteor crater so it's
not a dome at all it's a big hole in the
ground it's an optical illusion that our
brain uh sees the uh picture when it's
inverted as sticking up above the desert
floor rather than being a giant hole in
it so if we look back to arist stas here
again we have the image of that uh
apparent Dome structure sticking up
glowing away there but what's really
happening is the picture's upside down
and if you turn it around I think it
looks less like a dome it still looks a
bit weird but it doesn't necessarily
quite jump out at you that this is uh
sticking up it looks a little bit more
like it's a a depression
but it still looks like an alien
reactor what happens though if you get a
bit closer and get some better
photographs well sadly a much better
more focused image and you begin to see
there's just a crater um it's an impact
crater it's got a small lump in the
center and just above it there is some
of the ejector and another crater which
has a long re or lava tube moving away
from it now the lunar reconnaissance
Orbiter has produced some fantastic
photographs and this is one of them of
arist starus shows the crater um 42 km
in diameter and it is one of the
youngest uh of the craters on the moon
that's why it's so bright the fresh
material has been brought to the surface
by the impact and on the moon the longer
that material is exposed to the
radiation of the solar wind coming from
the Sun lots of charged particles it
tends to turn the material darker and
darker with age so the dark bits of the
Moon are the most uh elderly the ones
that have been exposed to the solar wind
for the longest the bright bits they're
very freshly turned up newly exposed
material but lro has done even better
and this is a picture of the central
Mountain here so I think we can just see
this is indeed just mountain with the
shadow at the top there um um so sadly
no alien
reactor now these Central mountains are
interesting they form in most craters
this one's perhaps a slightly strange
shape but most impact craters form when
a bolide a meteor comes in smashes into
the ground and of course on the moon
they tend to hit without being slowed
down by the atmosphere because there
isn't one as would happen on Earth um so
they arrive at great speed
and as the diagram shows it punches a
hole in the ground which then rebounds
upwards creating this uh Central peak in
the middle of the the crater I've got a
little animation here of a water droplet
falling and you can see the rebound
there go there it goes a few times you
see the effect of the the rebound up in
the center there and of course that
happens The Rock gets liquefied and
behaves rather like the water rather
like a very sticky version of the water
and it tends to freeze in position as it
cools leaving the central raised
Mountain as a permanent feature which
obviously doesn't happen with the
water so here's another animation on the
left hand side here of the shot wave and
the uh material melting the ejector
flying outwards and then slumping back
down to form the crater walls and the
overshoot and rebound leading to that
classic crater shape
so the other thing that's strange about
aristas is that it does seem to be very
blue in color a sort of electric blue
coloration to it got two pictures here
the big one on the right is from Galileo
doing a flyby which took a picture of
the the crater out there towards the day
night limb of the Moon there um it looks
fairly white but there is a hint of blue
but in the Clementine photo from two
years later as that passed by even
closer you've definitely got that
electric blue and that's the weird thing
about it is that it only really looks
blue to us through telescopes just on
when the light is absolutely right
within sort of one or two days of the
correct phase of the moon do we get this
weird electric blue color here's another
photograph and I think this really does
show the blue what's happened here is
they've wound the color contrast the
saturation up a little bit and you can
see the electric blue crater you can
also see how the ejector blanket and the
outflow um from the volcanic eruptions
which have caused some of those lava uh
tubes that you can see wiggling across
the surface there those are sort of
brown in color and then you've got the
other material which is a sort of slate
gray with a tin tinge of Blue from the
surrounding area and these are different
minerals there's a lot more titanium in
the uh blue around and a lot more iron
in the Browner areas so the moon does
look to have some color if you uh use a
camera and try and wind the color up a
little bit it's quite
amazing there we have it a bit closer
you can see that Central Mountain I
think it's a fascinating uh picture this
one got a lot of detail in it here's
another one we can zoom right in on the
whole Plateau you can see that actually
there is a raised area which is the
volcanic part of the system with the uh
features leading away from it called
schroter Valley which is that collapsed
lava tube that's been leading away from
these ancient volcanoes and then you've
had the the modern impact uh over to the
left hand side there that's made that
big crater so it's a combination of an
older volcanic system and a crater that
happens to have landed on top of it
there's another detailed picture of the
160 kilm long um CED lava tube of sh's
Valley and we see these on Earth we see
Lava Tubes I've been inside one in
Iceland fascinating to go down and have
a look here's a picture of another one
uh an even bigger Longer one in the
kumara cave in Hawaii it's uh just
incredible to see these lava would have
been flowing down here and then what
happens is that where it's exposed at
the top and the edges it cools fastest
solidifies there protecting the hotter
lava flowing down the tube and then of
course eventually the volcano stops
erupting and the lava flows out far end
leaving these hollow
tubes now arist starus has also been
Associated not only with nuclear
reactors and being a strange blue color
but with activity on the
moon sometimes people say the Moon is
geologically dead they talk about the
fact that it's a small body and it must
have lost all of its heat to the to
space and cooled right off and that
there can't be any volcanic activity
anymore but lots of people in history
have reported what we call transient
lunar phenomenon
tlps these are strange changes in the
picture of the of the Moon the image
that we see um and sometimes we have
some photographs of
this that probably confirm that
something happened the picture at the
top right captured in May of 26 is an
interesting case there's a sudden little
bright flash and it's probably a meteor
hitting the moon creating that flash I
mean meteors hit the Earth all the time
they must hit the moon all the time and
the modern uh trend of lots of cameras
everywhere is meaning that we're
beginning to see some of these events on
the other hand down at the bottom right
hand corner when you look at the Moon
through a small telescope and you're
looking through the Earth's atmosphere
at it the turbulence in the Earth's
atmosphere can cause the image to wobble
backwards and forwards and if you watch
that image not only do the uh parts of
the image wobble but occasionally bits
of them suddenly brighten up um just by
the chance way that the Optics are
behaving with that turbulence and that
can cause people to think that there's
something going on so it's been very
much a controversial subject as to
whether or not these transient Luna
phenomenon are real and the map on the
left is showing where people think
they've observed them and the larger the
circle the more often they've been
observed so actually the most common
area for seeing them seems to be around
the uh arist darkus area so that's uh
definitely an area of interest for this
sort of thing so is this picture of one
well there's the moon in its ordinary
position and here we see a bright flare
up in another image of the Moon not so
good quality but there you have it where
there's a sudden brightening so maybe
something was happening there maybe it
was a meteorite maybe though it was a
small Outburst of some sort and the
Apollo Landers did detect some uh
evidence of small moonquakes so we're
not absolutely sure what's going on
it's possible that uh these aristarchus
area is still volcanically active and is
still producing at least gaseous
eruptions Apollo 15 in 1971 Flew Over
the area and detected uh radiation alpha
particles uh which seem to have come
from decay of the uh Radioactive gas
radon 222 and um that would have come
from the decay of heavy elements like
uranium in the lunar crust uh turning
into radon eventually and the radon gas
can then bubble up slowly and uh float
around in the vicinity of the moon so
for Apollo to detect it there must be a
reasonable amount of it there and in
fact that was confirmed just in
1998 by the lunar prospector Mission
which also went past other gases that
have been detected in Fairly B amounts
of course nitrogen carbon dioxide carbon
monoxide so for them to be present they
must have a source it must be leaking
out of the moon's crust even if it's not
a violent
eruption now in fact lunar
reconnaissance Orbiter has detected
about 70 young volcanic structures
across the the moon marked on the map
there it maps that rectangle and we see
it there with all the little dots on it
and the the bright yellow dot on the
left that's arist darkus again so uh
there are some clusters in various parts
of the Moon very interesting how it's
not scattered randomly but they're
definit signs of uh some thing going on
there now in 1953 Dr Leon Stewart
pictured here with his homade telescope
look um saw a flash on the moon and
actually managed to take a photograph of
it and again it's another one of these
uh cases but the Clementine sign
satellite has been able to follow up on
that many years later uh 1994 so 41
years afterwards and uh yeah we can see
that there is a fairly new crater
roughly in the right spot so this was
probably another impact
event here it is again another picture
of it little tiny white spot in the
inset region on the
left but there are other reports of
somewhat more spectacular things that
was seen just with the naked eye and if
we go all the way back to jodani Bruno
in the year 1178 18th of June he
reported as follows he reported an hour
after sunset from the
midpoints of the Flaming division a
flaming torch sprang up and spewing out
over a considerable distance fire hot
coals and
Sparks so what he was saying there is
that he was observing the horns of the
moon when it was a very thin Crescent
and suddenly it erupted in flames and
fire from his point of view it was also
reported by some a group of five monks
from Canterbury in the UK they said
there was a bright new moon and as
usually in that phase its horns were
tilted towards the east and suddenly the
upper horn split in two from the
midpoint of this division a flaming
torch sprang up spewing out over a
considerable distance fire hot coals and
Sparks roughly the same description
meanwhile the body of the Moon which was
below red as it were in anxiety and to
put it in the words of those who
reported it to me and saw it with their
own eyes so this is a secondhand report
that Moon throbbed like a wounded snake
afterwards it resumed its proper State
the phenomenal was repeated a dozen
times or more that's interesting isn't
it the flame assuming various twisting
shapes at random and then returning to
normal then after these
Transformations the Moon from horn to
Horn that is along its whole length took
on a blackish appearance so something
fairly significant happened here you
could put it down to a meteor strike
except for the fact that it says the
phenomenon was repeated a dozen times
that sounds more like there was an
eruption
a volcano going off very interesting
indeed this is the image of the crater
though that Apollo 11 followed up and
took now we think this is the crater
that they are talking about it's a you
new crater very much dates to the round
about the right time very very young
indeed and it seems to have a classic uh
ejector blanket around it of material
being hurled out in the right sort of
shape for an impact crater rather than
a
volcano but very interesting that they
reported it erupting a dozen times that
that just seems uh wrong for a simple
impact event which would be a sudden
event and all over very rapidly now this
crater is right on the edge of the Moon
making it very very difficult to observe
in fact as the moon goes around the
earth because it's in a slightly
elliptical orbit it might try to keep
one face pointing towards us but it
spins on its axis at a fixed speed so it
takes a whole month to rotate on its
axis while it revolves around us in its
orbit in exactly a month but at a
variable speed so when it's closest to
the earth it's moving faster when it's
further away it moves more slowly this
is uh all down to gravity and Kepler's
laws and Newton's laws of planetary
motion
and the result of that is that the view
from Earth we managed to see about
57% of the
total uh area of the Moon because at
times some parts of it appear Over the
Horizon and some disappear on the
corresponding opposite side as we go
through the month and Bruno's crater is
right on the edge so that sometimes it
appears visible and sometimes not but
it's very very difficult for us to see
it directly from Earth so of course
lunar reconnaissance orbitor to the
rescue this is the giant hole in the
ground um but bizarrely we think it's 4
million years young this crater so it
can't have been an
impact that Bruno witnessed he wasn't
around 4 million years ago he was around
in the year um 1100 or so so it just
doesn't quite add up this is still a bit
of a
mystery if anyone knows the answer I'd
be welcome it in the
comments it was suggested that uh oops
it was suggested that
um this was uh
formed by the CR in the crater and then
there were eruptions from underneath but
who knows now other stories about things
that were observed on the moon well we
go back to this Baron FRS Von grous he
suggested that craters were impact
events previous to that everybody
thought they were volcanoes and of
course Sir Patrick Moore was keen on the
volcanic idea M right up through the
1960s um so it was uh around for a very
long
time difficult to tell without really
good images but now that we have them it
seems obvious that the vast majority are
in fact these impact
craters but
the baron also identified what he
thought was a walled City on the moon
I've in set it on the overlay there um
of one of his drawings of this walled
City that he thought he' discovered um
and of course he produced uh a more
detailed diagram of it again this is a
handrawn image it was before the days of
Photography and so you were reliant on
looking with a telescope through that
wobbly image that you see through the
Earth's atmosphere and trying to
identify it so there we have it now I
suspect this is more a case of just over
interpreting what he could see a bit
like the whole business about uh the um
canals on Mars people seeing straight
lines out of a series of dots and so
forth um so afraid there isn't really a
wall City there at all now if we go back
to the idea of the different colors of
the moon this is an image of the full
moon that I took you've got aristar at
the left Tao crater at the bottom uh you
can see some of the really bright
material that's the young freshly dug up
material whereas the maray the Seas on
the moon are the smoother flatl looking
large areas and they're very dark now
because they're dark this tends to mean
they're very ancient and that they've
been exposed foot to the Sun for a very
long time so these are the older parts
of the Moon dating rack about four 4
billion years um here's a colored
picture of
those Mar those Seas of the Moon trying
to indicate how old we think they are
and you can see that most of this is in
the blue part which tends to indicate
three and a half to 3.8 billion years
old the Sea of Tranquility M tranquilit
Artis where the Apollo 11 Mission landed
that's even older up to four billion
years uh but over near towards uh the
left hand side of the diagram there we
do have some rather younger material and
uh that's emerged more recently and been
exposed to the solar wind for less time
so it's very interesting and these of
course are giant puncture wounds most of
these large features that you see are
circular and they are from huge impacts
into the surface of the Moon punching
right through and allowing material to
come up and flow across the surface from
the molten interior of the Moon way back
at the
time another mission that's been to the
Moon to study this is the lunar Grail
mission of 2011 the gravity probe it
it's a pair of satellites orbiting the
moon and studying how the slight
variations in the force of gravity could
be used to map the structure and the
density of the the Moon itself so we got
the optical picture of the moon on the
left and then the gravity picture giving
the height in the middle and then the
gravity gradients so it's the how much
the gravity is changing on the right and
I think if you look at the picture on
the right you can really make out that
these things were giant impacts and
they're obviously circular puncture
wounds in the surface of the Moon for a
lot of the mar and then there's one
massive but not quite perfectly circular
wall going almost all the way around a
great big scar on the moon covering most
of that surface follow the blue line
around that's uh probably one absolutely
enormous impact very early on and we
know it's earlier than all the others
because they're on top they've happened
afterwards so it's likely that the moon
when it formed in orbit around the
Earth as a result of an impact of a
large object into the Earth a lot of
material was blasted off into orbit
around the moon and it either formed a
disc and then the moon Co coalesced out
of the disc or more likely several
smaller moonlets all formed so the moon
might have originally had a bunch of
sister moonlets and the this giant
impacts that we see here could well be
this Moon that we now have merging with
its uh smaller sisters and uh that would
be a sort of fascinating thing to be
able to go and prove wouldn't it now
here's a another impact that was caught
in the event the impact on the left
there just to the right of the arist
darkus crater you can see the inset
where the bright flash is and then we've
also got an image on the right of the
sort of before and after of this uh
moonscape with no crater and then a
young bright material being thrown up
nice new crer being formed so it's
pretty solid evidence for it um there's
another one this was actually caught in
the act and uh this was uh in 2012 again
can see the crater eruption and the
before and after
photograph in 2003 Comet eh1 smashed
into the moon or at least part of it did
and you can see the bright flash caught
in this little video so these impacts
really do happen and the more people are
pointing camera is at the moon the more
often we're discovering them so uh the
moon's far from the boring gray thing
covered in craters there is stuff going
on there and it's well worth having a
look and so we'll end this little
presentation just with this really nice
picture of the aristarchus crater area
with that electric blue light so thanks
very much for listening and uh more
later